<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy-compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Analysis of Serbian Songs</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1 id="Home">Serbian Songs</h1>
        <hr />
        <h2>Table of Contents</h2>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemIV">IV – SMILIA[5]</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemV">V – HARVEST SONG</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemVII">VII – KISSES</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemX">X – SALUTATION OF THE MORNING STAR</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXI">XI – THE KNITTER</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXIII">XIII – ROSA</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXIV">XIV – THE maiden AND THE SUN</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVI">XVI – THE FALCON</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVII">XVII – DEER AND VILA</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVIII">XVIII – VIRGIN AND WIDOW</a>
        </li>
        <hr />
        <p>
            <h2 id="PoemIV">IV – SMILIA[5]</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Sweet Smilia-flowers did Smilia pull,<br /> Her sleevelets and her bosom full;<br /> By
            the cool stream she gather'd them,<br /> And twined her many a diadem--<br /> A diadem
            of flowery-wreaths;--<br /> One round her brows its fragrance breathes;<br /> One to her
            bosom-friend she throws;<br /> The other where the streamlet flows<br /> She flings, and
            says in gentlest tone--<br /> "Swim on, thou odorous wreath! swim on,<br /> Swim to my
            Juris' home, and there<br /> O whisper in his mother's ear:<br /> 'Say, wilt thou not
            thy Juris wed?--<br /> Then give him not a widow's bed;<br /> But some sweet maiden,
            young and fair.'"<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemV">V – HARVEST SONG</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Take hold of your reeds, youths and maidens! and see<br /> Who the kissers and kiss'd of
            the reapers shall be.<br /> Take hold of your reeds, till the secret be told,<br /> If
            the old shall kiss young, and the young shall kiss old<br /> Take hold of your reeds,
            youths and maidens! and see<br /> What fortune and chance to the drawers decree:<br />
            And if any refuse, may God smite them--may they<br /> Be cursed by Paraskeva, the saint
            of to-day!<br /> Now loosen your hands--now loosen, and see<br /> Who the kissers and
            kiss'd of the reapers shall be.[6]<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemVII">VII – KISSES</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> What's the time of night, my dear?<br /> For my maiden said, "I'll come"--<br /> Said
            "I'll come,"--but is not here:<br /> And 'tis now the midnight's gloom.<br /> Lone and
            silent home I turn'd;<br /> But upon the bridge I met her--<br /> Kiss'd her: How my hot
            lips burned!--<br /> How forget it--how forget her!<br /> In one kiss full ten I
            drew:<br /> And upon my lips there grew,<br /> From that hour, a honey-dew,<br /> As if
            sugar were my meat,<br /> And my drink metheglin sweet.<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemX">X – SALUTATION OF THE MORNING STAR</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Lo! the maiden greets the day-star! "Sister!<br /> Sister star of morning! well I greet
            thee;<br /> Thou dost watch the world from thine uprising<br /> To thy sinking hour. In
            Hercegovina,<br /> Tell me didst thou see the princely Stephan?<br /> Tell me, was his
            snowy palace open,<br /> Were his steeds caparisoned, and ready;<br /> And was he
            equipp'd his bride to visit?"<br />
        </i>
        <i> Gently then the morning star responded:<br /> "Lovely sister! beautiful young
            maiden,<br /> True, I watch the world from my uprising<br /> To my setting;--and in
            Hercegovina<br /> Saw the palace of the princely Stephan;<br /> And that snowy palace
            was wide open,<br /> And his horse was saddled, and was ready,<br /> And he was equipp'd
            his bride to visit:<br /> But not thee--not thee--another maiden;<br /> False tongues
            three have whisper'd evil of thee;<br /> One has said--thine origin is lowly;<br /> One,
            that thou art treacherous as a serpent;<br /> And the third, that thou art dull and
            dreamy."<br />
        </i>
        <i> Then the maiden pour'd her imprecations:<br /> "He who said my origin was lowly,<br />
            Never let a child of love be born him;<br /> He who called me treacherous as a
            serpent,<br /> Round his heart, O! let a serpent wreathe it;<br /> Through hot summers
            in his hair be tangled,<br /> Through cold winters in his bosom nestle;<br /> He who
            dar'd to call me dull and dreamy,<br /> Nine long years may he be worn by
            sickness,<br /> And no sleep renew his strength to bear it."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXI">XI – THE KNITTER</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> The maiden sat upon the hill,<br /> Upon the hill and far away,<br /> Her fingers wove a
            silken cord,<br /> And thus I heard the maiden say:<br /> "O with what joy, what ready
            will,<br /> If some fond youth, some youth adored,<br /> Might wear thee, should I weave
            thee now!<br /> The finest gold I'd interblend,<br /> The richest pearls as white as
            snow.<br /> But if I knew, my silken friend,<br /> That an old man[11] should wear thee,
            I<br /> The coarsest worsted would inweave,<br /> Thy finest silk for dog-grass
            leave,<br /> And all thy knots with nettles tie."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXIII">XIII – ROSA</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Under roses slept the maiden Rosa,<br /> And a rose fell down and waken'd Rosa;<br /> To
            the flower-rose, said the maiden Rosa--<br /> "Rose of mine! O fall, not on the
            maiden,<br /> I am in no tune of soul to love thee,<br /> For a heavy grief o'erwhelms
            my spirit;<br /> youthwould have me--but old age hath won me.<br /> An old bridegroom is
            a worthless maple;<br /> When the wind is up it faints and trembles;<br /> When the rain
            descends, decay decays it:<br /> But a young bride, is a roselet budding;<br /> When the
            wind is up, its fair leaves open,<br /> When the rain descends, it shines in
            beauty,--<br /> When the sun comes forth, it smiles and glories."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXIV">XIV – THE maiden AND THE SUN</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> A maiden proudly thus the sun accosted:<br /> "Sun! I am fairer far than thou,--far
            fairer;<br /> Fairer than is thy sister[12] or thy brethren,--<br /> Fairer than yon
            bright moon at midnight shining,<br /> Fairer than yon gay star in heav'n's arch
            twinkling,<br /> That star, all other stars preceding proudly,<br /> As walks before his
            sheep the careful shepherd."<br /> The sun complain'd to God of such an insult:<br />
            "What shall be done with this presumptuous maiden?"<br /> And to the sun God gave a
            speedy answer:<br /> "Thou glorious Sun! thou my beloved daughter![13]<br /> Be joyous
            yet! say, why art thou dejected?<br /> Wilt thou reward the maiden for her folly--<br />
            Shine on, and burn the maiden's snowy forehead.<br /> But I a gloomier dowry yet will
            give her;<br /> Evil to her shall be her husband's brother;<br /> Evil to her shall be
            her husband's father.<br /> Then shall she think upon the affront she gave thee."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVI">XVI – THE FALCON</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> The falcon soars both far and high,<br /> He spreads his pinions in the sky,<br /> Then
            from his cloudy heights he lowers,<br /> And seats him on the city's towers:<br /> He
            sees a laughing girl of grace,<br /> In crystal water bathe her face;<br /> And looks
            with open, eager eye<br /> Upon her neck of ivory:<br /> White as the snow upon the
            mountain;<br /> And there he hears a youthrecounting<br /> His tale of love.--"Now bend
            thy head<br /> Upon thy snowy neck," he said;<br /> "Its whiteness is too bright for
            me:<br /> And 'neath it sorrowing heart may be."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVII">XVII – DEER AND VILA</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> A young deer tracked his way through the green forest,<br /> One lonely day--another
            came in sadness;<br /> And the third dawn'd, and brought him sighs and sorrow:<br />
            Then he address'd him to the forest Vila:<br /> "Young deer!" she said, "thou wild one
            of the forest,<br /> Now tell me what great sorrow has oppress'd thee?<br /> Why
            wanderest thou thus in the forest lonely:<br /> Lonely one day,--another day in
            sadness,--<br /> And the third day with sighs and anguish groaning?"<br />
        </i>
        <i> And thus the young deer to the Vila answer'd:<br /> "O thou sweet sister! Vila of the
            forest!<br /> Me has indeed a heavy grief befallen;<br /> For I had once a fawn, mine
            own beloved,<br /> And one sad day she sought the running water:<br /> She enter'd it,
            but came not back to bless me:<br /> Then tell me, had she lost her way and
            wander'd?<br /> Was she pursued and captured by the huntsman?<br /> Or has she left
            me?--has she wholly left me?--<br /> Loving some other deer--and I forgotten.<br /> O!
            if she has but lost her way, and wanders,<br /> Teach her to find it--bring her back to
            love me.<br /> O! if she has been captured by the huntsman,<br /> Then may a fate as sad
            as mine await him.<br /> But if she has forsaken me--if, faithless,<br /> She loves
            another deer--and I forgotten--<br /> Then may the huntsman speedily o'er take
            her."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVIII">XVIII – VIRGIN AND WIDOW</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Over Sarajevo flies a falcon,<br /> Looking round for cooling shade to cool him.<br />
            Then he finds a pine on Sarajevo;<br /> Under it a well of sparkling water;<br /> By the
            water, Hyacinth, the widow,<br /> And the Rose, the young, unmarried virgin.<br /> He
            look'd down--the falcon--and bethought him:<br /> "Shall I kiss grave Hyacinth, the
            widow;<br /> Or the Rose, the young, unmarried virgin?"<br /> Thinking thus--at last the
            bird determined--<br /> And he whisper'd to himself sedately,<br /> "Gold--though long
            employ'd, is far, far better<br /> Than the finest silver freshly melted,"<br /> So he
            kiss'd--kiss'd Hyacinth, the widow.<br /> Very wroth wax'd then young Rose, the
            virgin:<br /> "Sarajevo! let a ban be on thee!<br /> Cursed be thy strange and evil
            customs!<br /> For thy youths they love the bygone widows,<br /> And thy aged men the
            untried virgins."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. </body>
</html>
