<poems>
    <head>
        <title>Analysis of Serbian Songs</title>
    </head>
        <h1 id="Home">Serbian Songs</h1>
        <hr />
        <h2>Table of Contents</h2>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemIV">IV – SMILIA[5]</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemV">V – HARVEST SONG</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemVII">VII – KISSES</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemX">X – SALUTATION OF THE MORNING STAR</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXI">XI – THE KNITTER</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXIII">XIII – ROSA </a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXIV">XIV – THE maiden AND THE SUN</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVI">XVI – THE FALCON</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVII">XVII – DEER AND VILA</a>
        </li>
        <li>
            <a href="#PoemXVIII">XVIII – VIRGIN AND WIDOW</a>
        </li>
        <hr />
        <p>
            <h2 id="PoemIV">IV – SMILIA[5]</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i>
            <span class="AdjFemPos">Sweet</span>
            <span class="NounFem">Smilia</span>-flowers did <span class="NounFem">Smilia</span>
            pull,<br /> Her sleevelets and her bosom full;<br /> By the cool stream she gather'd
            them,<br /> And twined her many a diadem--<br /> A diadem of flowery-wreaths;--<br />
            One round her brows its fragrance breathes;<br /> One to her bosom-friend she
            throws;<br /> The other where the streamlet flows<br /> She flings, and says in gentlest
            tone--<br /> "Swim on, thou odorous wreath! swim on,<br /> Swim to my <span
                class="NounMale">Juris</span>' home, and there<br /> O whisper in his <span
                class="NounFem">mother</span>'s ear:<br /> 'Say, wilt thou not thy <span
                class="NounMale">Juris</span> wed?--<br /> Then give him not a widow's bed;<br />
            But some <span class="AdjFemPos">sweet</span>
            <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>, <span class="AdjFemPos">young</span> and <span
                class="AdjFemPos">fair</span>.'"<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemV">V – HARVEST SONG</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Take hold of your reeds, <span class="NounMale">youths</span> and <span class="NounFem"
                >maiden</span>s! and see<br /> Who the <span class="NounFem">kissers</span> and
                <span class="NounFem">kiss'd</span> of the <span class="NounMale">reapers</span>
            shall be.<br /> Take hold of your reeds, till the secret be told,<br /> If the <span
                class="Noun">old</span> shall kiss <span class="Noun">young</span>, and the <span
                class="Noun">young</span> shall kiss <span class="Noun">old</span>
            <br /> Take hold of your reeds, <span class="NounMale">youths</span> and <span
                class="NounFem">maidens</span>! and see<br /> What fortune and chance to the drawers
            decree:<br /> And if any refuse, may <span class="Noun">God</span> smite <span
                class="Noun">them</span>--may <span class="Noun">they</span>
            <br /> Be cursed by <span class="NounFem">Paraskeva</span>, the <span class="NounFem"
                >saint</span> of to-day!<br /> Now loosen <span class="Noun">your</span> hands--now
            loosen, and see<br /> Who the <span class="NounFem">kissers</span> and <span
                class="NounFem">kiss'd</span> of the <span class="NounMale">reapers</span> shall
            be.[6]<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemVII">VII – KISSES</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> What's the time of night, <span class="NounFem">my dear</span>?<br /> For my <span
                class="NounFem">maiden</span> said, "<span class="NounMale">I</span>'ll
            come"--<br /> Said "<span class="NounMale">I</span>'ll come,"--but is not here:<br />
            And 'tis now the midnight's gloom.<br /> Lone and silent home <span class="NounMale"
                >I</span> turn'd;<br /> But upon the bridge <span class="NounMale">I</span> met
                <span class="NounFem">her</span>--<br /> Kiss'd <span class="NounFem">her</span>:
            How my hot lips burned!--<br /> How forget it--how forget <span class="NounFem"
                >her</span>!<br /> In one kiss full ten <span class="NounMale">I</span> drew:<br />
            And upon my lips there grew,<br /> From that hour, a honey-dew,<br /> As if sugar were
            my meat, <br /> And my drink metheglin sweet. <br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemX">X – SALUTATION OF THE MORNING STAR</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Lo! the <span class="NounFem">maiden</span> greets the <span class="NounFem"
                >day-star</span>! "<span class="NounFem">Sister</span>!<br /> Sister <span
                class="NounFem">star</span> of morning! well <span class="NounFem">I</span> greet
                <span class="NounFem">thee</span>;<br /> Thou dost watch the world from thine
            uprising<br /> To thy sinking hour. In Hercegovina,<br /> Tell me didst thou see the
            princely <span class="NounMale">Stephan</span>?<br /> Tell me, was his snowy palace
            open,<br /> Were his steeds caparisoned, and ready;<br /> And was he equipp'd his <span
                class="NounFem">bride</span> to visit?"<br />
        </i>
        <i> Gently then the morning <span class="NounFem">star</span> responded:<br /> "<span
                class="AdjFemPos">Lovely</span>
            <span class="NounFem">sister</span>! beautiful <span class="AdjFemPos">young</span>
            <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>,<br /> True, I watch the world from my
            uprising<br /> To my setting;--and in Hercegovina<br /> Saw the palace of the princely
                <span class="NounMale">Stephan</span>;<br /> And that snowy palace was wide
            open,<br /> And his horse was saddled, and was ready,<br /> And he was equipp'd his
                <span class="NounFem">bride</span> to visit:<br /> But not thee--not thee--another
                <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>;<br />
            <span class="AdjNeg">False</span>
            <span class="Noun">tongues</span> three have whisper'd evil of thee;<br /> One has
            said--thine <span class="NounFem">origin</span> is <span class="AdjFemNeg"
            >lowly</span>;<br /> One, that <span class="NounFem">thou</span> art <span
                class="AdjFemNeg">treacherous</span> as a serpent;<br /> And the third, that <span
                class="NounFem">thou</span> art <span class="AdjFemNeg">dull</span> and <span
                class="AdjFemNeg">dreamy</span>."<br />
        </i>
        <i> Then the <span class="NounFem">maiden</span> pour'd her imprecations:<br /> "He who said
            my origin was lowly,<br /> Never let a child of love be born him;<br /> He who called me
            treacherous as a serpent,<br /> Round his heart, O! let a serpent wreathe it;<br />
            Through hot summers in his hair be tangled,<br /> Through cold winters in his bosom
            nestle;<br /> He who dar'd to call me dull and dreamy,<br /> Nine long years may he be
            worn by sickness,<br /> And no sleep renew his strength to bear it."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXI">XI – THE KNITTER</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> The <span class="NounFem">maiden</span> sat upon the hill,<br /> Upon the hill and far
            away,<br /> Her fingers wove a silken cord,<br /> And thus I heard the <span
                class="NounFem">maiden</span> say:<br /> "O with what joy, what ready will,<br /> If
            some <span class="AdjMalePos">fond</span>
            <span class="NounMale">youth</span>, some <span class="NounMale">youth</span>
            <span class="AdjMalePos">adored</span>,<br /> Might wear thee, should I weave thee
            now!<br /> The finest gold I'd interblend,<br /> The richest pearls as white as
            snow.<br /> But if I knew, my silken friend,<br /> That an <span class="AdjMaleNeg"
                >old</span>
            <span class="NounMale">man</span>[11] should wear thee, I<br /> The coarsest worsted
            would inweave,<br /> Thy finest silk for dog-grass leave,<br /> And all thy knots with
            nettles tie."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXIII">XIII – ROSA </h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Under roses slept the <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>
            <span class="NounFem">Rosa</span>,<br /> And a rose fell down and waken'd <span
                class="NounFem">Rosa</span>;<br /> To the <span class="NounFem">flower-rose</span>,
            said the <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>
            <span class="NounFem">Rosa</span>--<br /> "<span class="NounFem">Rose</span> of mine! O
            fall, not on the <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>,<br /> I am in no tune of soul to
            love thee,<br /> For a heavy grief o'erwhelms my spirit;<br />
            <span class="NounMale">youth</span>would have me--but old age hath won me.<br /> An
                <span class="AdjMaleNeg">old</span>
            <span class="NounMale">bridegroom</span> is a <span class="AdjNeg">worthless</span>
            <span class="Noun">maple</span>;<br /> When the wind is up it faints and trembles;<br />
            When the rain descends, decay decays it:<br /> But a <span class="AdjFemNeg"
                >young</span>
            <span class="NounFem">bride</span>, is a <span class="NounFem">roselet</span>
            <span class="AdjFemPos">budding</span>;<br /> When the wind is up, its fair leaves
            open,<br /> When the rain descends, it shines in beauty,--<br /> When the sun comes
            forth, it smiles and glories."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXIV">XIV – THE maiden AND THE SUN</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> A <span class="NounFem">maiden</span> proudly thus the <span class="Noun">sun</span>
            accosted:<br /> "<span class="Noun">Sun</span>! <span class="NounFem">I</span> am <span
                class="AdjFemPos">fairer</span> far than thou,--far <span class="AdjFemPos"
                >fairer</span>;<br />
            <span class="AdjFemPos">Fairer</span> than is thy sister[12] or thy brethren,--<br />
            <span class="AdjFemPos">Fairer</span> than yon bright moon at midnight shining,<br />
            <span class="AdjFemPos">Fairer</span> than yon gay star in heav'n's arch
            twinkling,<br /> That star, all other stars preceding proudly,<br /> As walks before his
            sheep the careful shepherd."<br /> The sun complain'd to God of such an insult:<br />
            "What shall be done with this <span class="AdjFemNeg">presumptuous</span>
            <span class="NounFem">maiden</span>?"<br /> And to the <span class="Noun">sun</span>
            <span class="Noun">God</span> gave a speedy answer:<br /> "Thou glorious <span
                class="NounFem">Sun</span>! thou my <span class="AdjFemPos">beloved</span>
            <span class="NounFem">daughter</span>![13]<br /> Be joyous yet! say, why art thou <span
                class="AdjFemNeg">dejected</span>?<br /> Wilt thou reward the <span class="NounFem"
                >maiden</span> for her folly--<br /> Shine on, and burn the <span class="NounFem"
                >maiden</span>'s snowy forehead.<br /> But I a gloomier dowry yet will give
            her;<br /> Evil to her shall be her <span class="NounMale">husband's
            brother</span>;<br /> Evil to her shall be her <span class="NounMale">husband's
                father</span>.<br /> Then shall she think upon the affront she gave thee."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVI">XVI – THE FALCON</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> The <span class="Noun">falcon</span> soars both far and high,<br /> He spreads his
            pinions in the sky,<br /> Then from his cloudy heights he lowers,<br /> And seats him on
            the city's towers:<br /> He sees a <span class="AdjFemPos">laughing</span>
            <span class="NounFem">girl</span> of <span class="AdjFemPos">grace</span>,<br /> In
            crystal water bathe her face;<br /> And looks with <span class="AdjFemPos">open</span>,
                <span class="AdjFemPos">eager</span>
            <span class="NounFem">eye</span>
            <br /> Upon her <span class="NounFem">neck</span>
            <span class="AdjFemPos">of ivory</span>:<br />
            <span class="AdjFemPos">White</span> as the snow upon the mountain;<br /> And there he
            hears a <span class="NounMale">youth</span>recounting<br /> His tale of love.--"Now bend
            thy head<br /> Upon thy <span class="AdjFemPos">snowy</span>
            <span class="NounFem">neck</span>," he said;<br /> "Its whiteness is too bright for
            me:<br /> And 'neath it sorrowing heart may be."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVII">XVII – DEER AND VILA</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> A <span class="AdjMalePos">young</span>
            <span class="Noun">deer</span> tracked his way through the green forest,<br /> One
            lonely day--another came in sadness;<br /> And the third dawn'd, and brought him sighs
            and sorrow:<br /> Then he address'd him to the forest <span class="NounFem"
            >Vila</span>:<br /> "<span class="AdjMalePos">Young</span>
            <span class="NounMale">deer</span>!" she said, "thou wild <span class="NounMale"
                >one</span> of the forest,<br /> Now tell me what great sorrow has oppress'd
            thee?<br /> Why wanderest thou thus in the forest lonely:<br /> Lonely one day,--another
            day in sadness,--<br /> And the third day with sighs and anguish groaning?"<br />
        </i>
        <i> And thus the <span class="AdjMalePos">young</span>
            <span class="NounMale">deer</span> to the <span class="NounFem">Vila</span>
            answer'd:<br /> "O thou <span class="AdjFemPos">sweet</span>
            <span class="NounFem">sister</span>! <span class="NounFem">Vila</span> of the
            forest!<br /> Me has indeed a heavy grief befallen;<br /> For I had once a <span
                class="NounFem">fawn</span>, mine own <span class="AdjFemPos">beloved</span>,<br />
            And one sad day she sought the running water:<br /> She enter'd it, but came not back to
            bless me:<br /> Then tell me, had she lost her way and wander'd?<br /> Was she pursued
            and captured by the huntsman?<br /> Or has she left me?--has she wholly left me?--<br />
            Loving some other <span class="NounMale">deer</span>--and I forgotten.<br /> O! if she
            has but lost her way, and wanders,<br /> Teach her to find it--bring her back to love
            me.<br /> O! if she has been captured by the huntsman,<br /> Then may a fate as sad as
            mine await him.<br /> But if <span class="NounFem">she</span> has forsaken me--if,
            faithless,<br /> She loves another <span class="NounMale">deer</span>--and I
            forgotten--<br /> Then may the huntsman speedily o'er take her."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. <p>
            <h2 id="PoemXVIII">XVIII – VIRGIN AND WIDOW</h2>
        </p>
        <a href="#Home">(Go back to top)</a>
        <br />
        <i> Over Sarajevo flies a falcon,<br /> Looking round for cooling shade to cool him.<br />
            Then he finds a pine on Sarajevo;<br /> Under it a well of sparkling water;<br /> By the
            water, <span class="NounFem">Hyacinth</span>, the <span class="NounFem"
            >widow</span>,<br /> And the <span class="NounFem">Rose</span>, the <span
                class="AdjFemPos">young</span>, unmarried <span class="NounFem">virgin</span>.<br />
            He look'd down--the falcon--and bethought him:<br /> "Shall I kiss <span
                class="AdjFemNeg">grave</span>
            <span class="NounFem">Hyacinth</span>, the <span class="NounFem">widow</span>;<br /> Or
            the <span class="NounFem">Rose</span>, the <span class="AdjFemPos">young</span>,
            unmarried <span class="NounFem">virgin</span>?"<br /> Thinking thus--at last the bird
            determined--<br /> And he whisper'd to himself sedately,<br /> "Gold--though long
            employ'd, is far, far better<br /> Than the finest silver freshly melted,"<br /> So he
            kiss'd--kiss'd <span class="NounFem">Hyacinth</span>, the <span class="NounFem"
                >widow</span>.<br /> Very <span class="AdjFemNeg">wroth</span> wax'd then <span
                class="AdjFemPos">young</span>
            <span class="NounFem">Rose</span>, the <span class="NounFem">virgin</span>:<br />
            "Sarajevo! let a ban be on thee!<br /> Cursed be thy strange and evil customs!<br /> For
            thy <span class="NounMale">youths</span> they love the bygone widows,<br /> And thy
                <span class="AdjMaleNeg">aged</span>
            <span class="NounMale">men</span> the <span class="AdjFemNeg">untried</span>
            <span class="NounFem">virgins</span>."<br />
        </i> S. J. B. 
</poems>