<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/css" href="index_djb.css"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="index_djb.css" />
        <title>Serbian Songs</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <main>
            <header>
                <div class="hasBackground">
                    <h1>Gender Analysis of Serbian Women’s Songs</h1>
                </div>
            </header>
            <nav>
                <ul class="nav">
                    <li><a href="index.xhtml">Home</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><a href="project.xhtml">Project</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="methodology.xhtml">Methodology</a></li>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><a href="corpus.xhtml">Corpus</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="english-corpus.xhtml">English Poems</a></li>
                            <li><a href="serbian-corpus.xhtml">Serbian Poems</a>
                                <ul>
                                    <li><a href="#">1 to 35</a></li>
                                    <li><a href="#">36 to 69</a></li>
                                </ul>
                            </li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><a href="analysis.xhtml">Analysis</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><a href="conclusions.xhtml">Conclusions</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><a href="contacts.xhtml">Contacts</a>
                        <ul>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                            <li><a href="#">Open</a></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                </ul>
            </nav>
            <div class="hasBackground3">
                <h2>Introduction</h2>
                <p style="text-align:center;"><audio controls="controls"
                    src="http://serb-songs.obdurodon.org/media/Serbian-folk-song.mp3"></audio></p>
                <p>Folklore is an essential component that helps to shape the identity of a
                    countries and their cultures. Countries of the former Yugoslavia have a rich and
                    extensive history of folk music and poetry, some of which is featured in "An
                    Anthology of Jugoslav Poetry" by Dr. B Stevenson Stanoyevich. This text analyzes
                    the deeper religious, nationalistic, and emotional connotations of the poetry.
                    This look into the realm of folklore is important because it acknowledges its
                    relevance in the cultural shaping of the country. In this project I aim to
                    research the gender aspects of traditional Yugoslav folk music and poetry.</p>
                <br />
                <p>We will use XML to mark up the pronouns and nouns, that are typically perceived
                    as masculine or feminine in the lyrics and prose. Since Yugoslav culture tends
                    to be patriarchal, We are interested in seeing whether or not women are more
                    frequently described in the literature, or simply just described and how that is
                    representative of the traditional culture as a whole.</p>
                <br />
                <p>We think using folk songs and poetry is useful because not only is it still
                    popular in the countries of the former Yugoslavia, but it is also especially
                    popular amongst the diaspora in the United States. The longevity of the
                    literature speaks to its greater impact. The findings from this research would
                    be useful for interdisciplinary studies, such as: Gender Studies, Slavic
                    Studies, and Cultural Studies. It could also be used to develop into a broader
                    study of the effects of nationally based music in Eastern Europe and how it can
                    potentially provide social support for the continuation of patriarchal societies
                    and traditional ideals. It will also help to shed light on how it is necessary
                    to change how we interpret products of culture as we progress, but we must also
                    be sure to not downplay its repercussions. This research could develop into a
                    more sociological based study.</p>
            </div>
        </main>
    </body>
</html>
