<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="index.css" />
        <title>Serbian Songs</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" -->
        <br />
        <br />
        <br />
        <div class="hasBackground">
            <h1>Gender Analysis of Serbian Women’s Songs</h1>
            <figure>
                <p style="text-align:center;">
                    <audio controls="controls"
                        src="http://serb-songs.obdurodon.org/media/Serbian-folk-song.mp3"> </audio>
                </p>
            </figure>
        </div>
        <div class="hasBackground">
            <h2>Introduction</h2>
            <p>Folklore is an essential component that helps to shape the identity of a countries
                and their cultures. Countries of the former Yugoslavia have a rich and extensive
                history of folk music and poetry, some of which is featured in "An Anthology of
                Jugoslav Poetry" by Dr. B Stevenson Stanoyevich. This text analyzes the deeper
                religious, nationalistic, and emotional connotations of the poetry. This look into
                the realm of folklore is important because it acknowledges its relevance in the
                cultural shaping of the country. In this project I aim to research the gender
                aspects of traditional Yugoslav folk music and poetry.</p>
            <br />
            <p>We will use XML to mark up the pronouns and nouns, that are typically perceived as
                masculine or feminine in the lyrics and prose. Since Yugoslav culture tends to be
                patriarchal, We are interested in seeing whether or not women are more frequently
                described in the literature, or simply just described and how that is representative
                of the traditional culture as a whole.</p>
            <br />
            <p>We think using folk songs and poetry is useful because not only is it still popular
                in the countries of the former Yugoslavia, but it is also especially popular amongst
                the diaspora in the United States. The longevity of the literature speaks to its
                greater impact. The findings from this research would be useful for
                interdisciplinary studies, such as: Gender Studies, Slavic Studies, and Cultural
                Studies. It could also be used to develop into a broader study of the effects of
                nationally based music in Eastern Europe and how it can potentially provide social
                support for the continuation of patriarchal societies and traditional ideals. It
                will also help to shed light on how it is necessary to change how we interpret
                products of culture as we progress, but we must also be sure to not downplay its
                repercussions. This research could develop into a more sociological based study.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="hasBackground">
            <br />
            <br />
            <h2>Serbia</h2>
            <br />
            <p>Officially the Republic of Serbia is a country situated at the crossroads of Central
                and Southeast Europe in the southern Pannonian Plain and the central Balkans. The
                sovereign state borders Hungary to the north, Romania to the northeast, Bulgaria to
                the southeast, North Macedonia to the south, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to
                the west, and Montenegro to the southwest. The country claims a border with Albania
                through the disputed territory of Kosovo. Serbia's population is about seven
                million. Its capital, Belgrade, ranks among the oldest and largest citiеs in
                southeastern Europe.</p>
            <p>Inhabited since the Paleolithic Age, the territory of modern-day Serbia faced Slavic
                migrations to the Balkans in the 6th century, establishing several sovereign states
                in the early Middle Ages at times recognized as tributaries to the Byzantine,
                Frankish and Hungarian kingdoms. The Serbian Kingdom obtained recognition by the
                Vatican and Constantinople in 1217, reaching its territorial apex in 1346 as the
                relatively short-lived Serbian Empire. By the mid-16th century, the entirety of
                modern-day Serbia was annexed by the Ottomans, and their rule was at times
                interrupted by the Habsburg Empire, which started expanding towards Central Serbia
                from the end of the 17th century while maintaining a foothold in the north of the
                country. In the early 19th century, the Serbian Revolution established the
                nation-state as the region's first constitutional monarchy, which subsequently
                expanded its territory. Following disastrous casualties in World War I, and the
                subsequent unification of the former Habsburg crownland of Vojvodina (and other
                territories) with Serbia, the country co-founded Yugoslavia with other South Slavic
                peoples, which would exist in various political formations until the Yugoslav Wars
                of the 1990s. During the breakup of Yugoslavia, Serbia formed a union with
                Montenegro, which was peacefully dissolved in 2006. In 2008, the parliament of the
                province of Kosovo unilaterally declared independence, with mixed responses from the
                international community.</p>
            <p>Serbia is a member of the UN, CoE, CERN, OSCE, PfP, BSEC, CEFTA, and is acceding to
                the WTO. Since 2014 the country has been negotiating its EU accession with
                perspective of joining the European Union by 2025. Serbia dropped in ranking from
                Free to Partly Free in the 2019 Freedom House report. Since 2007, Serbia formally
                adheres to the policy of military neutrality. An upper-middle income economy with a
                dominant service sector followed by the industrial sector and agriculture, the
                country ranks relatively high on the Human Development Index (66th), Social Progress
                Index (45th) as well as the Global Peace Index (54th).</p>
            <br />
            <br />
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
