<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="index.css" />
        <title>Serbian Songs</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <main>
            <nav><!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" --></nav>
            <br />
            <br />
            <br />
            <div class="hasBackground">
                <h1>Gender Analysis of Serbian Women’s Songs</h1>
                <figure>
                    <p style="text-align:center;">
                        <audio controls="controls"
                            src="http://serb-songs.obdurodon.org/media/Serbian-folk-song.mp3"
                        > </audio>
                    </p>
                </figure>
            </div>
            <div class="hasBackground">
                <h2>About the Project</h2>
                <p>Our project consists of a gender-based analysis of Serbian folk songs based on
                    both an English and Serbian source. We were interested in seeing the different
                    nouns and adjectives used to refer to and describe women,but our main focus was
                    on the connotation of the adjectives.Through XML mark-up we distinguished
                    between male and female nouns and adjectives; for the adjectives we only noted
                    the gender and whether it is positive or negative, but for the nouns we marked
                    the gender, relationship (familial, general, or romantic) and the type of noun
                    (a specific name or a general noun). </p>
                <p>For future work on this project, we would want to expand our corpus and
                    extrapalate on the different categories of nouns that we marked. We were not
                    able to include all the elements of our original research question due to the
                    time constraints of the course.</p>
                <h2>Research Questions</h2>
                <p>Are men or women mentioned more in the Serbian women's songs, and are they
                    described as being largely positive or negative? How do differences in
                    connotation of adjectives show how the culture (or a subsection of it) viewed
                    women?</p>
                <h3>Hypothesis</h3>
                <p>Our hypothesis was that women would be featured sparingly and in predominantly
                    negative roles in the poems. This hypothesis is not supported by the data. </p>
                <br />
                <h2>The Researchers</h2>
                <h4>Emma Mamula (emmamamulal)</h4>
                <p>Pursued a Slavic Studies degree with a BCS minor and REEES certificate.</p>
                <h4>Mitchell Luckman (MLuckman)</h4>
                <p>Majors in Russian and Political Science with a REEES certificate, additionally
                    studies BCS.</p>
                <h4>Daniel Daudinot (ddaud02)</h4>
                <p>Studied Applied Linguistics and Spanish at the University of Pittsburgh, in
                    addition to his interest in languages, he is very interested in learning about
                    the impact of technologies such as computational analysis in language
                    analises.</p>
                <h2>Acknowledgments to</h2>
                <p>This project is a collaboration of students from the University of Pittsburgh
                    specifically as a final project of class CLASS-1050 of the spring of the year
                    2019. The project was directly supervised by David J. Birnbaum who is a
                    Professor and Co-Chair of the Department of Slavic Languages and Literatures at
                    the University of Pittsburgh. Birnbaum has been involved in the study of
                    electronic text technology since the mid-1980s, has delivered presentations at a
                    variety of digital humanities conferences, and has served on the board of the
                    Association for Computers and the Humanities, the editorial board of Markup
                    languages: theory and practice, and the Text Encoding Initiative Council. Much
                    of his electronic text work intersects with his research in medieval Slavic
                    manuscript studies, but he also often writes about issues in the philosophy of
                    markup. At the University of Pittsburgh he regularly teaches “Computational
                    methods in the humanities”, a coding-intensive XML-oriented course that is
                    cross-listed in eight departments.</p>
            </div>
        </main>
    </body>
</html>
